[Music]
hey everyone welcome to the smart
economy podcast a production of neo.com
I'm your host Dylan Grabowski in this
episode of the smart economy podcast I
sat down and spoke with allejo pinto the
co-founder of pontum network a product
Studio working Global Financial
inclusion powered by blockchains in this
conversation we discussed people's
choices to transact freely building on
the Move virtual machine and the
relationships with the developers who
are building it connecting with
different layer one and layer 2
blockchain networks the suite of
products under the pontum networks
umbrella building on the Aptos and other
blockchain ecosystems and so much more
just a reminder nothing said in this
podcast is a solicit ation to buy or
sell any tokens and that the host or
guests May hold tokens discussed in any
given episode you can check out a
disclaimer on neon newday.com I really
enjoyed this conversation with aljo and
I hope you enjoy it too hey everyone
welcome to the smart economy podcast
today we're joined by allejo Pinto the
co-founder at pontum Network I'm really
excited to get uh this conversation
started because pontum is working on all
sorts of different VMS and connecting uh
different blockchain networks um so how
are you doing today Leo doing great
thank you for having me on yeah um I
want to kind of jump off into the deep
end to start this conversation off and
um I want to talk about EVMS and non-ms
particular newer VMS uh VM stands for
virtual machine for those who aren't
aware and in a world where we still have
all the tvl and all the daily active
users and all the developer activity
seemly happening on ethereum and other
evm compatible networks why is today now
the time to start looking at alternate
or alternative virtual machines to start
building on and is this something that
will compete with or ultimately replace
the ethereum virtual machine yeah so my
perspective and I think many other
crypto people would agree is that
fundamentally We're Here For Freedom the
freedom to transact with each other over
the internet and freedom comes in many
many iterations and one thing that is
not free is vendor lockin being stuck
and using only one language or only
using one virtual machine is something
that sucks for a developer and therefore
uh this is a monopoly that the evm has
that we're trying to break uh for no
reason other than it was first to Market
and there's a giant Network effect of
being first to Market uh the evm has
become uh essentially synonymous with
all of crypto not only for ethereum but
other ecosystems like Avalon and BMB
that came after it simply because
developers can easily copy paste their
code and uh deploy evm contracts uh
however when you look at the history of
the evm uh it was put together kind of
last minute so Gavin wood and and
vitalic Gavin was the CTO he's uh now at
polka dot uh of ethereum essentially put
together the evm as a way to uh yeah
have composable Smart contracts on
ethereum uh so litery as a language is
uh very easy to use it looks a lot like
a typescript language so it's intuitive
in how you build out logic business
logic however it does have a lot of um
what some developers would call issues
so for example uh re-entrancy errors so
having Dynamic dis patch is something
that had unintended consequences so you
know is is definitely good in some
instances but has caused issues like the
da the infamous Dow hack which force the
ethereum fork that's ether that's one
ethereum classic and ethereum for uh
also there's no built-in upgradeability
so if you want to do upgradeable smart
contracts for uh let's say Integrations
or even like as a transition to
immutable contracts for decentralization
you have to use proxy essentially a
proxy which can uh lead to obfuscation
of how the contracts actually work this
is actually how the blast the recent
blast Hack That was around 60 Millions
$60 million happened where the developer
essentially included uh vulnerability
into the original contract and then uh
through proxy contracts was able to obus
skate how the con how the software was
actually working so the developer was
able to essentially then use the
vulnerability that was first put into
the the version of the of the code that
was deployed to withdraw $60 million and
other languages like move the upgrade
abilities buil in to the virtual machine
so you when you deploy the contract you
can set it to be immutable you can set
it to be upgradable and then actually
track a history of the upgrades for the
contract so uh another big one is
performance so rust based virtual
machines or rust based um yeah are way
more performant uh they're built in with
paralyzation or concurrency at the
virtual machine we're integrating this
now into the evm so you've probably
heard of trends like the paralyzed evm
so you can run transactions in parallel
have for example uh two markets in an
amm or an order book Running In Parallel
let's say AP um usdc eth and Bitcoin
usdc uh can run in parallel as opposed
to being sequentially called on a
contract um you also get uh uh safety
improvements for example Russ is a has
static uh is a static type language so
as I mentioned earlier you don't get
things like Dynamic dispatch uh it's a
yeah Russ Russ in general is more
performant for low level applications
like things that run really close to the
servers which fundamentally uh
blockchain applications are and uh
that's all to say that people just
really want freedom freedom to build
with whatever language they want to
express themselves however they want so
one good example is the difference
between move and the salon of VM so the
salon of VM uh you probably heard that
it's like chewing glass because it's so
difficult uh well Russ gives you a lot
of expressivity to build contracts
however you want you can build the same
thing a million different ways and a lot
of developers honestly very like that a
lot because they're not constrained by
boundaries on how to uh use the code and
they can think of creative ways to make
it more performant or execute in ways
that they wanted to whereas something
like move has a lot more guard rails
which make it uh maybe easier to adopt
for someone that you know is in hardcode
coder uh it's more intuitive feels more
like a texcare language similar to
solidity so people really like it for
that but then those same guard rails are
constraints on how you can build out the
code and express yourself but
fundamentally people going back to my
original statement is people just want
the freedom they don't want to be vendor
locked in into any specific language
they want to be able to come in and uh
use a languages that they want for the
specific use cases that they want and
that's what we're enabling uh we want to
build out a credibly neutral layer so
that you can deploy with um most major
virtual machines that are popular onto
the popular l2s and l1s so that you're
not stuck using evm or you're suck using
move or suck using Salon ofm awesome
what a what a fantastic response to kind
of kick off off the the conversation in
what you were saying there were so many
threads I want to pull on uh but I do
kind of want to take a step back real
quick and just kind of get a sense for
how long you've been in the space you're
you you spent some time at uh IBM and at
other blockchain companies but when was
like the first time you heard about
Bitcoin or ethereum and you know if
you're like me you probably just read
about it and then overlooked it and
years later came back so when was the
first time you heard about
cryptocurrency and maybe when was the
first kind of aha moment that you had
that you were like this is the place I
want to build yeah I got into crypto
back in 2014 so very early on uh started
looking into Bitcoin and at the at the
time it seemed really interesting uh I
brought it to one of my uh teachers at
school and essentially mentioned that uh
like it shouldn't even work just the
fact that it does work so for
technically speaking it's not too
complex just like A6 running uh you know
random hashes to prove something
uh but the game theory around these
adversarial parties essentially
coordinating to maintain the value of
something that is just arbitrary like
just bites of code that are finite
Supply um and it was holding steady at I
think like a few hundred dollars at the
time so it was he said that it was
really interesting you know definitely
continue to keep an eye on it kind of
went down the rabbit hole on the
economic theory of um hard money and why
it's important to have money that
doesn't have an infinite mint button
essentially like the US dollar
uh and that kind of caught me in and and
you know continue following it for a
while uh after I graduated from uh
College went over to IBM and then made
my way into IBM blockchain and yeah
continue following it and then made the
leap into crypto uh around 2021 but
throughout that whole time you know I
just read a lot of white papers in my
free time continue looking at it
actually remember when Neo uh first when
aners turned into Neo so I go all the
way back to that uh time but yeah uh a
lot of roller coaster rides
fundamentally I think the saying that
stands steady is just Bitcoin as a store
of value and as an internet of money uh
a lot of other projects going to come
and go and it's really hard to replicate
one the Immaculate Conception that
Bitcoin had just a fair launch where
there is no Central locus of control so
it really is like a decentralized
currency um and then two the actual
utility of having something that cannot
be stopped um I think Bitcoin is
probably the only one that's truly State
actor censorship resistant like China
has tried to ban it several times and
only makes it stronger whereas you know
I think some conservative effort from
some State actors could probably take
down most most cryptocurrencies today
yeah I 100% agree um maybe the second
closest most decentralized network is
ethereum uh possibly um but I think it's
super interesting that you landed at IBM
in my Cher research of your background
it didn't look like you got a degree in
computer Sciences or anything super
technical like that so um what was kind
of like your Landing point at IBM and
and how did you end up at IBM blockchain
and maybe um could you just share a
little bit about what the Enterprises
perspective is of blockchain were they
more interested in like private
consortia chains or were they interested
in exploring public chains because I
remember for the longest time the
narrative was like blockchain not
Bitcoin and then all all sorts of other
sayings that have come and gone over the
years but I do think it's really
interesting to to kind of glean some
insight from you because it's not very
often we get to talk with someone who
get to look into the belly of the Beast
yeah so uh when I was in school I was
actually really interested in AI my uh
major was cognitive science and I uh
concentrated in computation uh I were
doing AI research is like super super
applied so did more of like a tech
business um implementation of what I
studied uh at IBM yeah very interesting
the perspective because I think just
from uh um just being conservative in
nature from being a very large publicly
listed company crypto cryptocurrency
even today right is uh just something
that is can be either really good or
really bad so we've seen it even with
companies like Tesla acquiring Bitcoin
and then getting pushback on you know
the climate impact of it even though
it's like I can go into why I I think
Bitcoin could actually solve climate
change um but yeah I mean I think
generally they're very sensitive to uh
being able to jump in
internally there's definitely a lot of
people and most of the people that were
in blockchain definitely really like
Bitcoin and and cryptocurrency in
general but yeah it's taking the idea
was to take that same technology and
then apply it within private networks so
you don't need uh like the game theory
of of of an asset that's worth something
to coordinate people that are you know
could be adversarial so like let's say
if you're within the same network of
Distributors and suppliers for Walmart
for example you're generally not going
to be aial you're going to be on the
same page so it would make sense to
create a almost like an internet um
where you can essentially have one
database that doesn't have a database
administrated then can go in and change
records uh to track you know the supply
chain of food or the supply chain of
packaging uh so use cases like that made
a lot of sense IBM probably work with
most of the companies uh that we looking
to do uh proof concepts for blockchain
the way that most large companies work
is they have an innovation they have an
innovation team and then the Innovation
team essentially has a budget every year
where they're innovating or trying out
new things even if they never go into
production so there's definitely for a
period of time sufficient budget to you
know try out everything I think the hard
part is that actually getting people to
coordinate on setting the parameters for
that database or that shared network is
really hard and then doing updates and
setting up channels uh it's more like a
governance or coordination issue which
again uh a token that enables a token
that's fundamentally worth something
that people are coordinating to maintain
the value of is like that perfect
coordination mechanism so for Bitcoin
for example the miners need to expend
electricity and they wouldn't want to
Fork into like Bitcoin cash or you know
all the other efforts that have tried to
Fork Bitcoin because Bitcoin the one
that people want to use is the one
that's worth something which they can
sell into to continue you know using
electricity so you know very Simply
Having something that uh is you know
doesn't have a ton of rules that it's
just relatively simple implementation to
track one spreadsheet and that anyone
can plug into I think that's also an
important component where the
permissions of okay how do you decide
who now you know how do you decide who
you bring in and then what channels you
let them into all of that is just a
large coordination problem that you know
maybe like you can vote with tokens or
something like that to like enable but
generally if you just have something
that's open permissionless anyone can
can Jo
uh it's a lot easier of a coordination
problem because you don't really need to
coordinate anymore anyone can just come
and join so I think fundamentally that's
why public blockchains uh just work
better than permission ones I think
there's still use cases and for example
wholesale banking I believe JP Morgan
has a like a famous one where billions
of dollars are are flowing through for
wholesale banking where a bunch of banks
can settle with each other essentially
um I think there's probably also use
cases for other Financial applications
like uh for examp example if you had a
ledger of all the Brokers for stocks
maybe something like the GameStop Saga
would have happened where we would have
had you know instead of uh all these
different spreadsheets that needed
reconciliation and because we we had
more shares outstanding we didn't really
know how many shares were were were
existed that they had to haul trading if
you had that essentially you know even
if you're Computing you a if you're
Computing offchain and then just posting
everyone's posting to the same Ledger
even if it's a public ledger so you can
maintain privacy just like prove of
having the assets so that we can make
sure that everything adds up to 100 is
probably could cause you know could
probably improve a lot of the processes
that we have now and get us closer to t0
for settlement across institutions and
that um eventually ends up benefiting
the end user that doesn't have to deal
with stuff like this um same for
remittances for example I think that's
another really good one where once you
like break down how the financial system
works there's so many intermediaries and
each
intermediary essentially has their own
spreadsheet that they need to then
reconcile with everyone else and you
know any errors there are probably like
you know human input errors or software
bugs where a blockchain just
fundamentally fixes that it's just like
a simple spreadsheet that everyone
agrees is like the source of Truth so um
yeah I think uh even though there's
definitely used cases for permission
blockchains I think it's just generally
easier for the public ones to um to work
yeah I mean so at the beginning of this
conversation you touted on the freedom
to transact and the freedom to build you
just touted the benefits of a public
blockchain despite the fact that maybe
uh private companies might benefit from
or like sensorized companies might
benefit from privacy and then there are
ways to work around that where maybe you
can maintain an offchain Ledger but then
once a day upload to a public Ledger
that everybody can view I would imagine
that this ethos probably runs very
deeply in anyone who's working on some
sort of blockchain at a publicly traded
company like IBM so were a lot of your
co-workers your peers did do you find
that most of them stayed at IBM or did a
lot of people have a similar story to
you where they ultimately left and went
to go work on decentralized networks
yeah definitely I think most people at
this point have probably moved onto
other things in crypto um yeah it's just
very hard to uh get through you know
some of these projects I think one one
that was public facing is um what was
being done with Stellar IBM was trying
to do remittances uh that was going to
be competitive with with xrp using
Sellar um Jesse Lun was I believe the
name of the guy that was uh yeah Jesse
Lun um that was pushing that forward
with an IBM but yeah it's just honestly
very hard because you might have the
best idea ever and it might bring you
know a ton of Revenue but if the public
or the markets just see it as the
opposite even today right like we live a
bit in a bubble where you know everyone
around us really likes crypto but
sometimes you step out and people still
I mean for good reason like there is a
lot of scams definitely a lot of like
gray areas um but you know generally I
think I mean I don't know even Bitcoin
probably like manipulated in some way
and whatever but like once you step
outside of the bubble like not
everybody's uh perspectives on crypto
are positive so it's really hard as a
public yeah publicly traded company to
really have uh something like this um
yeah even like I mean even if you look
at PayPal and Robin Hood they kind of
like yo-yo back and forth whether they
like it or not and um I think like Robin
Hood at one point like made a really a
ton of investments into it and then like
let everyone go and then like made a ton
of Investments back and it's all just
correlated with the price uh of the
markets anyways yeah no that's that's
great Insight um I think anybody who
works full-time in this space if they
can relate with what you just said
whenever they go home for Thanksgiving
or Christmas or holiday dinners um
they'll just talk with their family and
hear all the the negative insights that
people might have about cryptocurrencies
blockchains whatever I mean it's not
that hard to open up a newspaper and see
some crappy thing that happened in the
in the blockchain space um so I think
it's fair to kind of like provide that
Nuance um just for folks who our
audience is generally like pretty aware
of what blockchains are and and various
different networks because this is a
protocol agnostic podcast but before we
kind of like delve into more of what
you're doing and what pontum network is
doing I do kind of want to take a step
back and talk about uh the move VM so
like could you just share um who built
it why it was built um you you kind of
already spoke about rust and why that
was a kind of like the superior language
from like a a lower level to to kind of
use to build the move VM but yeah I just
kind of want to use uh the who built it
as kind of like uh a launching point for
the rest of the conversation yeah
definitely so uh very famously the team
at Facebook now meta uh started building
the move virtual machine at at initially
Libo which they revolved into DM uh the
main purpose of it was to so if you talk
to Sam blacksher who is at sui now uh he
was part of the team that helped build
this out also Wolf Gang who's atap those
um the main reason is that they wanted
something that was performant and safe
so similar to rust but had the guard
rails and intuitiveness of solidity so
move you can think of as the best of of
rust and solidity where essentially you
get all the benefits performance and
safety of rust but you also get a
language that's very intuitive to use
looks a lot like a typescript language
so it feels more like solidity and it
has a bunch of guard rails and features
built in um so a lot of this you can
honestly do with evm which again is like
why I think in the end doesn't really
matter what you choose it's more so like
you know what you like what you like
using uh so for example uh approver for
formal verification is something that
you can do with solidity uh you can pull
in a third party library and do formal
verification on your smart contracts uh
however the move virtual machine has it
built in so that you can just do this
naely so that you don't have to depend
on a third party contract uh sorry third
party Library uh again third party
Library sometimes are supply chain
attacks so you know there could be
issues there um but yeah I mean
essentially it's I would say it's
nothing entirely new it's kind of like
everything it's Innovation everything
that's innov is just taking components
that already exist and then putting them
together in a way that's more useful so
yeah think of like putting together rust
solidity uh the latest and uh safety
Innovations like the native Prov and
then putting it all into something
that's really easy to use so developers
can just start building um intuitively
with move and get all the benefits of
rust and all the safety uh features that
we built in yeah I think before we move
on one of the key things when I'm like
digging around and looking into what mve
VM is and and the pros and cons and the
things that differentiates it from other
virtual machines is parallelization so
could you just kind of like maybe Eli 5
for our audience who like knows enough
to be dangerous but doesn't know how to
code what parallelization is and maybe
give an example of a use case for why
this makes move VM kind of like
successful virtual machine for
leveraging this type of um like network
activity or whatever you want to call it
yeah the best analogy is roads so think
of a one-way Road where essentially
you're going from Miami to Key West and
it's only a single Lane Road and no
matter no matter how quickly you want to
go there or you know how fast your car
is compared to the one in front of you
you just have to wait for the one in
front of you uh to go through before
you're able to get there right so uh for
example when you make a contract call to
an amm uh let's say you want to trade
two assets or two different people want
to trade two very different pools so us
DC eth and usdc Bitcoin um you have to
wait because essentially they're
executed sequentially one in front of
the other uh with parallelization you
can have the pools essentially run in
parallel so think of you know a two-lane
road or four-way highway where you can
have these transactions essentially go
in parallel uh to get to the end end
goal without having to wait for the
other ones uh that are in front of it um
to uh to be a little bit more nuanced on
the different ways to do uh concurrency
which leads to paralyzation is and soana
ofm has what is called pessimistic
concurrency so with pessimistic
concurrency you essentially uh ahead of
time say the states of memory that
you're going to access and then you have
to lock those States in memory uh before
you implement them with optimistic
concurrency you don't have to
essentially pre predetermine which
states of memory you're going to access
so uh this leads to uh performance
enhanced performance enhancements
because you don't potentially need to
lock memory ahead of time before using
it so uh for example yeah like sometimes
in Solana you might notice even when
there's no congestion that a transaction
might take several seconds depending on
how complex it is um whereas like on
Aptos and essentially apos you're able
to you know most transactions settle
within a few seconds or under under a
second um but yeah uh that's I think
that's a good analogy think about it
single you know single Lane Road or uh
you know four-way four lane Highway yep
thanks I appreciate that so since uh
move VM I mean blockchain is only 15
years old so to say that a VM is new is
kind of funny because the whole industry
is still relatively new but based off of
the work that you guys are doing do you
ever find that um you locate some like
critical bugs or anything like that so
do you have kind of like a close
relationship with the movm developers um
is there a pipeline for you to sh your
experience as a product Builder on top
of it and when you share these
experiences are you able to find that
maybe there are some uh new features or
bug fixes that are added to the VM yeah
definitely so most of the maintainers
are actually at the Aptos team so move
actually has two dialects I would even
argue now there's two different virtual
machines one is the apos framework which
is the original move which was being
used at Libra and DM and then there's a
sui uh SOI move which they made updates
to it so that uh sui has a sui has a
dual consensus mechanism so there's
traditional consensus which looks a lot
like most blockchains but then they also
have consensus in the memory pool where
if you're only updating your own object
so an object within uh within that
address uh you can theoretically scale
infinitely because you're not
interacting with other objects that
other accounts or contracts are calling
so in order to implement that feature uh
sui essentially modified the move
virtual machine to access objects
differently from a central from a
central location and a lot of people
like that um it's not as agnostic to
other to using other blockchains given
that most other blockchains work more so
like optos and don't have this like dual
consensus um but yeah I mean definitely
there could be bugs there could be and
you know the movm is actually continuing
to have improvements over time new OP
codes are getting added and yeah there
could definitely be some critical bugs
that get implemented which is definitely
something that people should be
cognizant
um but yeah we work closely with the
opos team uh they do uh regular free
frequent meetings on on the Move
different people that are you know
working on on making improvements to the
language and then stakeholders like us
uh yeah to give them back feedback to
learn more about the road map and yeah I
mean at the end of the day most
technolog is built by a few people in a
room believe it or not even even Bitcoin
core developers are only like you know a
handful of them so um yeah uh but
generally people are conservative and uh
careful and you know adding new features
and everything goes through audits Etc
so but yeah could definitely happen even
happen on bitcoin by the way um they
were thinking I don't know if you've
seen on Twitter but udy is pushing this
campaign to add a new OP code to bitcoin
or like an OP code that was previously
in Bitcoin called cat op cat uh for
concatenation and that was previously
removed by Satoshi uh still a little bit
unclear why guess we'd have to go
through his like writings why he removed
it but they want to add it back on to be
able to have more programmability on the
L1 um but yeah I mean that could
introduce some fundamental bug that just
wrecks everyone um but who knows um I
definitely want to touch on bitcoin's
like Resurgence and new developer
activity and l2s and all this stuff but
I kind of want to relate it to uh the
lens that that that you have um maybe
later in the conversation uh I am
wondering though because uh mve VM was
built by the the DM and Libra developers
and you come from IBM so is this um kind
of relationship was it started that like
you guys kind of recognize that hey we
came from uh centralized Enterprise land
and we kind of speak the same speak but
we have the same passions do you find
that that's how kind of like this
relationship was formed or um am I
trying to connect the the dots that
don't exist and pulling for straws that
aren't there yeah it's a little bit
force but uh no I mean when I when I
joined uh pontum uh back back in 2021
that was still when Libra was around and
uh maybe it did help you know getting in
touch with them them saying that I was
from more traditional Tech background
but generally um the tech team at at
Libra was very open what they're
building um you know most of the
technology was open source at the time
anyways um and then that team evolved
into what is now Aptos and sui so even
through that we've maintained our
relationship but um yeah I mean it is it
is interesting because I think they do
when you talk to those teams they are
very different from other more crypto
native teams that you speak to and uh it
has both its pros and cons I would say
but generally uh yeah just interesting
to see to see that there is like a big
difference of people that come from
traditional Tech and people that are you
know have been in crypto for you know
five five 10 years yeah no I um Neo had
a a group of uh folks from who are x
Microsoft and you could definitely tell
like the values that they brought to the
table but also the different type of
language they spoke because they weren't
you know quote unquote blockchain
natives or anything like that so it's
really interesting despite the fact that
I might be reaching for something that
isn't there um so you guys work mostly
with aptose am I correct in saying that
as opposed to like Aptos and Ori yeah
correct we mostly work with Aptos yeah
cool so pontum has um a variety of
products uh under its Suite um so maybe
kind of like to jump into what you guys
are building and what you're working on
maybe you could just at a high level
share what the mission and vision is for
pontum network and then we can kind of
like jump into all the different cool
things you guys are building yeah so
ponon think of it as a product studio
and we're developing the pantum wallet
which is one of the top Wallets on Aptos
we also have liquid swap amm which has
70 to 80% of the total trading volume on
Aptos um and now this new product that
we're building is called lumio and it's
a way uh to expand Beyond Aptos so that
we essentially have the capability
ourselves and other teams have the
capability to not only to play move apps
but then extending that uh any of the
popular virtual machines so Salon VM is
another big one and we're also
researching web assembly um obviously
there's a ton of other virtual machines
but we're you know having to narrow the
scope to the ones that we think are most
popular where there's developer theand
and yeah starting to break that Monopoly
that the evm has it's useful for us
because similar to Unis swap which has
uh deployments across various chains
they're all evm we can now also start to
deploy without having to migrate
everything to solidity our contracts and
our code onto ethereum onto salana um
and essentially go head-to-head with
incumbents at each of these chains while
still maintaining one code base uh so
yeah and then the wallet we're also uh
going cross chain touching back on
bitcoin definitely a big Renaissance
happening there not just in the L1 with
orinal and runes but also with l2s where
you're going to have the same ability of
programmability um and again a lot of
these are going to be evm so this is why
we're also uh scoping out how to deploy
lumio there so so you can also deploy
our contracts and other teams from
salana and app those can also just go on
deploy um but yeah I mean generally as I
mentioned throughout the interview I am
more conservative I think Bitcoin and
ethereum definitely are the safest and
most decentralized and have state level
actor sensorship resistance I think
there's definitely value in these newer
blockchains like salana and Aptos um you
know they definitely bring way lower
cost and performance but that comes at a
trade-off to decentralization and the
censorship and so at the end of the day
it's important to explore these you know
users want users just want access to the
assets that they have in each of these
l1s that's the biggest issue the
fragmentation of liquidity and then uh
having the application natively means
that you don't have to rely on Bridges
so having these applications deployed as
trustless as possible enables people to
just um you know as an example do per
trading with their favorite application
that they use on Solana but now on a
Bitcoin L2 so they can do you know that
do that with BTC as opposed to only Soul
so uh yeah that's that's the vision
essentially uh deploy across various
chains and enable people to use the
assets that they want to use with any
application awesome you mentioned that
um you guys were building in the way
that you're building because you found
the largest developer base there so
maybe this is kind of like a one1
question that can be answered with a
single sentence maybe not how do you
guys keep your finger on the pulse for
where developers are building because
GitHub repositories might not always
provide like the most comprehensive
holistic view of an ecosystem and how
it's being built out so what are kind of
like the key metrics and figures that
you guys look for where the developer
activity is kind of the highest yeah I
think the most important metric so
people like to say yeah GitHub repos or
individual developers but I think the
most important thing is Venture back
teams because those Developers actually
have sufficient Runway to build
something you know you can have 100,000
developers that have no backing and
it'll be very hard for them to build a
sustainable project or you could have 10
developers that each raise you know2
three million um preed to build
something U and then those have a chance
at getting series a etc so uh I think
the most important metric is you know
going into an ecosystem talking to the
major teams there that have Venture
backing uh you know learning about their
background learning about their their
map and and uh and this is where I think
ethereum and salana have the most
valuable developers where again evm and
by extension Avalanche and BMV and all
these you know because a lot of the
stuff is just copy pasted um has a lot
of the Mind share but we're very quickly
seeing that salana um is overtaking this
or at least catching up uh radium uh
mango Jupiter these are all uh again
applications that end users use and
these developers are you know very high
quality and have sufficient resources to
continue building and then that drives
other developers to then raise funds and
then do Integrations that are built on
top of these other protocols and again
that's that's I think the most most
important metric to track for you know
quote unquote developer mind share it's
not just you know volume of developers
but I think quality and that quality is
um yeah that quality is uh anchored by
uh either Venture back they're just you
know funding for them to be able to
build what they're building yeah I love
that you bring that up so I've been
covering the Neo ecosystem as a content
creator since 2018 and during the Ico
boom you saw a lot of projects not just
on Neo but other blockchains kind of
rais their funds and then as the 201819
bear settled in their funds and Runway
got cut in half if not more and they
weren't able to what what would take
would have taken years to build out they
only had months to build it so um you
know as much as like VC is kind of a
negative term when you go on crypto
Twitter and you talk to like the retail
plebs um I think it is kind of very
valuable that you point that out so when
you're talking about Venture back um and
like pontum wallet are your VC's kind of
like funneling projects to you guys are
they making connections for you to be
able to add support for new projects to
the pontum wallet um and then on top of
that how does this kind of compete with
like metamask or is it even a
competition is it kind of like an Andor
or you know pontum and metamask yeah so
uh maybe a correction to my previous
doesn't need to be specifically Venture
backed I think any sort of backing so I
think Ico or public sales is also a you
know completely legitimate way I think
democratizing access to finance is also
important like ethereum did its Ico and
a lot of projects like noses for example
Ico at bcoin another one um yeah just
sufficient resources to build uh yeah
Venture venture Capital comes with its
benefits like networks of other projects
that they back and help be a pipeline
for Partnerships and agre um you know
future funding Etc so there's definitely
benefits there um but yeah generally I
think it's important to you know work
work with parties and and identify um
you know where where it's going to be
beneficial for you guys to to have um
you know positive you know positive
benefits from each other uh and regards
to metamask yeah I think definitely
could be definitely competitive we're
supporting the e m space as well um I
don't see them other than through the
snaps which is kind of like a platform
for Integrations entering salana or AOS
or even Bitcoin um because they're first
to Market I think their ability to
deploy any features or innovate is kind
of like maybe tempered a little bit or
maybe just they've become so big that
it's kind of hard to push new features
without the risk or major you know major
repercussions from a new feature going
you know going poorly um but yeah I mean
I think metam Mass Phantom are our
wallets that we see as you know
competitive and we we look up to as well
and hopefully we'll be a to reach um you
know some form of similar uh traction
yeah we're you know apos is like one
ecosystem where we've gotten you know
sufficient market share where now it
makes sense to start expanding to others
and continuing to grow the traction yeah
cool um are you able to kind of
determine the types of activity that
Aptos users are leveraging the pontum
wallet for
are you noticing that it's mostly for
defi is there a lot of nft activity in
the Aptos ecosystem and therefore on
pontum are there any other kind of like
unique use cases that you're seeing
emerge from the work that you've done
and the ecosystem that you work within
that maybe pontum might be building
toward uh so you can see generally on
out those where most of the transactions
and the contracts being called and given
that you know we're the one of the most
popular wallets you can kind of proxy
that so
most of it's definitely defi uh some
nfts I think although sadly the volume
is you know relatively low it's Aptos I
think has like there was like a post
about it being number five total with
polygon and then salana ethereum and
Bitcoin being above it but it was
something crazy like you know 10 bibs or
10% versus like Bitcoin having like 30%
of the training volume um I think an
interesting one that havon really taken
off is gaming where because Aptos is so
fast and cheap gaming you know doing
more onchain transactions could take off
but there really hasn't been like a huge
game the other day I was playing this
you know hyper casual game on the wallet
where you know each time you click it's
kind of like one of those Tower Defense
games and you each time you click it's
like you know sending a transaction but
um you know that's only possible in
something that's like Ultra fast and
cheap um but there hasn't been like a
major game that that really takes off
and surprisingly on either um I think
there's like high hopes for um star
Atlas I think it was the name of it um
but hasn't really you know I don't think
any of them have really materialized
which maybe just a testament of how
difficult it is to actually build you
know a good game yeah I mean also with
gaming if you look at like Reddit and
you go to the gaming subreddits there's
still a lot of vital and animosity
towards nfts you know we kind of touched
on earlier in the conversation about
bitcoin's energy consumption and and how
it's uh debatable whether it is actually
indeed destroying the planet or could be
used as a resource to uh better allocate
uh who gets electricity and energy and
how um and when during Peak and off peak
hours that this uh energy is consumed um
so yeah I I agree I think that there's
kind of more of like a first principle
fundamental shift that needs to take
place with Gamers before we can get to
this place and maybe it's not a
blockchain first project that chooses to
build a game that kind kind of takes off
it's more of like a AAA Studio that opts
to integrate blockchain into its game um
so really interested to kind of like
follow along with that as well um so
since you guys are building liquid swap
amm you're really close to Defi and the
network could you just um share a little
bit more about what liquid swap is why
you guys built the amm and maybe what
does trading activity look like is it
mem coins did meme coins go crazy on
aptose is it tokens that were migrated
from other networks what does that kind
of look like from your perspective yeah
definitely so at a high level liquid
swap is a constant product and
concentrated liquidity amm constant
product is uh the standard univ V2 x * y
equals K essentially when you deposit
liquidity uh you're covering the full
price range of that of those two assets
and then concentrated liquidity uh you
can set as a liquidity provider uh where
to concentrate the liquidity around the
current price of that asset so you can
be more Capital efficient um so standard
standard amm um it's the most popular
one it's deployed immutably on opto so
no no uh protocol upgrades which I think
is good um just like it's a good
heuristic for D5 should be immutable and
yeah most of the activity that we're
seeing is so not many coins there um
only one project only a few projects
have launched you know their governance
tokens so within defi you always just
see the main govern tokens there and
recently uh yeah a few meme coins
there's been like four or five that have
done you know fairly well I think
reached like a few tens of millions um
FTV um but yeah the C activity that
you're seeing on on apos on spot another
popular one which does well is Perpetual
Futures Trading especially when you have
really low fees people are just you know
doing these leverage trades um that's a
team called Merkel um and they're
building you know Perpetual Futures on
on Aptos and you can speculate pretty
much on like any any asset I think they
have a bunch of meme coins from other
ecosystems there and you can use USC as
collateral essentially uh but yeah
that's what most of the default activity
looks like on app those spot is mainly a
which is the main uh you know gas token
there and then a few meme coins and a
few governance tokens that I've launched
so when I'm looking into pontum and and
I stumble on lumio this is where I kind
of really start to get my mind blown by
the work that you guys are working on
um you're talking about salana VM evm
move you're talking l2s lumio was built
on the op stack so you guys are just
kind of like fingers in every different
pie you can think of um let's just start
with why you guys built your L2 based
off the op stack um and what network do
you guys rely on for uh the L2 to um
kind of like secure itself yep so what
we're doing with lumio is in integrating
into the major l2s and l1s so the first
iteration of this is on optimism where
the op stack is open source and uh
widely adopted not just by the op mayet
but other uh l2s like Bas um worldcoin
recently announced that they're doing
World chain there um mantle so uh we're
going to replicate that same process for
arbitrum Orbits for ZK zinc um hyper
chains but optimism was you know a good
place to start so the idea is that once
there's a shared sequencer uh the
optimism super chain it's going to feel
like one environment for the end user so
going to be sharing a bridge it's going
to be sharing a sequencer and users can
do effectively contract calls across
these different environments so that it
feels again like one being in one
environment even though it's
horizontally scaled across various
environments um so yeah I mean our goal
is essentially to integrate these
alternative VMS and just focus very
narrowly on the virtual machine
component whereas we benefit from all
the upgrades that is are being done to
the op stack like for example the the
prover uh Canon which is you know one of
the most difficult implementations to to
actually maintain so all the all the
upgrades that the op that the optimism
ecosystem is doing you know we benefit
from whereas we focus very narrowly just
on the virtual machine so that things
like Salon ofm applications and move
applications can then go the p in
optimism and then be composable with
other applications on base for example
or you know be main net so that's the
idea there um we actually also are
deploying onto salana we have a devet
again an L2 so it's going to be settling
onto salana but again this is going to
be completely separate from the op from
the environment and optimism think of us
as just having these multi-chain
deployments um where essentially people
want to deploy so from an user from an
application perspective like liquid swap
or um yeah Miracle or whoever you can
just now deploy onto optimism you know
you have the ability to depl salana
fairly soon uh whereas previously you
couldn't unless you migrated all your
code to You' have to migrate all your
code to solidity and salana BM and move
so now imagine having to maintain those
three different code bases is a headache
and then very difficult for you know
future upgrades so um yeah I think we're
what we're solving is like a very uh
pertinent issue for a lot of developers
and hopefully you know people see the
value in that and and start to use it
you might have already answered this
next question and the response you just
gave but I think you're the first guess
that we've had that is building within
the optimism super chain so could you
just like Eli five what that is for
someone who might not have had their who
might have had their head in the sand
and and maybe haven't really heard of
this yeah so each of the L2 Frameworks
arbitrum optimism ZK zinc uh are
building with the uh Road mapper idea
that uh essentially other ecosystems or
sorry other chains are building with the
same framework So within optimism that's
the op stack on arbitrum is called
orbits that they're going to be able to
connect to each other so that n users
don't feel like they're in all these
different separate environments so uh
what's outlined is that it'll be likely
through a shared sequencer so that
essentially you can have composability
so contracts can compose across
different l2s can do contract calls to
each other you'll have Shar liquidity so
one Bridge uh I think it's called the
super bridge on optimism so that there
is in you know 10 different versions of
ether usdc the liquidity is the same you
know it's because it's going through the
same input um and yeah this this has
this trade-off so the benefits are
you're sharing security you're sharing
liquidity across all these different l2s
uh the trade-off is you can use um
alternative data availability so for
example if you're base you're having to
use the same Ethel one data availability
as op mayet and all the others within
the super chain uh you know you can use
Celestia or you know any of the other
Alternatives which could could be faster
but arguably are not as safe you know so
could cause livess issues for example
like if celesio were to go down then you
know that that would definitely cause
issues within so it has this trade-offs
um but yeah the biggest benefit is that
you're essentially sharing security and
liquidity and composability across all
these l2s which are horizontally scaling
and then think of each L2 almost like an
L1 that you can fill with blockchain
with transactions so let's say you have
uh well Bitcoin is like one example say
you have Bitcoin it's one megabyte of
data that can only fit on the L1 if you
go on an L2 you can fit a lot more
information on an L2 but now if you have
two l2s running in parallel you can fit
a lot more information you know times
two and then that goes you know towards
end so you can essentially fit a bunch
of information on the layer two that
then gets compressed and batch process
you know there's still competition to
process that information back into the
L1 but at least uh you can have soft
confirmations and a lot of the
processing happening quote unquote off
chain in these l2s um and then these l2s
will have composability with each other
so from the end user perspective uh you
know when you're on a wallet and you're
let's say uh I don't know having a loan
using a flash loan or using a loan from
uh let's say a on Unis swap uh even
though they're on two separate you know
chains let's say bass and op mainnet it
should feel like from an end user
perspective like you're on the same on
the same chain so that's a huge issue
right now with the fragmentation of all
these l2s but uh definitely that um you
know all the major l2s are are working
towards but you're I imagine you're
still going to have fragmentation
between like arbitrum and optimism and
CK zinc for example but all the chains
that are built within optimism are going
to feel really nice and composed really
well together and then similarly all the
you know chains within arbitrum are
going to compose and feel really well
together um then maybe in the future
they agree on some standard to also
compose with each other but for now I
think this is what it's going to look
like essentially and this looks a lot
like Cosmos or poke dot where you also
have you know composability across um
these like heterogeneous environments
yeah perfect um kind of zooming out
we're we're nearing the end of our
conversation um I want to touch on some
like philosophical or whatever you want
to call it type of discussion um so you
guys are um building on l2s you guys are
building on uh VAR a different type of
L1 you have dipped your toes into the
water of evm land and non- evm land so
I'm just C ious because um uh non EVMS
are H they have a hard time competing
with evm right now um because there is
that developer share there is that user
base and all of that now I'm curious to
hear from your perspective does the up
is it as much of an uphill battle for an
L2 that is a a non-m as it is for l1's
um or is it just like a completely
different Battlefield in my opinion at
the end of the day it will down more to
the end user application and the end
user application is for example uh
Jupiter versus Unis swap or 1 in so
Jupiter is somewhat constrained within
Solana because it's not evm and then one
inch is constrained within evm but one
in one inch has um more Runway or more
options to deploy because there's more
chains support evm even salana supports
evm with neon right um so I think at the
end at the end of the day and users is
what drives developer activity like
developers are going to build you know
what end users are doing or they're
going to build applications agnostic to
the language right like when you use
Robin Hood or you use um Salesforce or
any other application you're not you're
not thinking like oh which you know
which language is this written in is it
no JS or whatever right like nobody
really cares you just care that it works
uh so I think similarly we're going to
see that and you know if you give
Jupiter the ability to deploy on
ethereum and you can now trade all your
e tokens and meme coins on ethereum as
you would on Solana you're just going to
go to d. a and trade whatever right like
you don't really care um as long as it
supports the assets that you care about
so um I would think less more so about
the language being you know the barrier
to adoption or what drives adoption I
think what's important is the
applications and then the assets those
applications enable so I think like a
challenge for Aptos is that you know
with move you can only offer and users
app those you know assets right so once
you're able to offer users salana assets
or able to offer users um evm assets
like ethereum or B&B or avac or whatever
then your end users end users on liquid
swap can now natively use you know their
eth that they have or their avac that
they have um without having to uh you
know Bridge or uh you know go through
these things that you know less safe um
so I mean at the end of the day I think
it just boils down to the end users
being able to use the applications with
the assets that they want to use yeah
the uh uh I I just had the agoric team
on the Pod and they called this chain
abstraction where a user can just swap
an asset from chain a to chain B and not
have any idea about bridges or anything
like that underlying in the background
it just worked for them they don't even
care what network it was on so from this
this future that you just or this this
world that you just kind of like painted
for us how far are we from that where
are we like a year away from this are we
10 years away from this from being able
to trade
a meme coin seamlessly on salana with
maybe a governance token on Aptos um if
you could take a wild guess where how
far away are we from this future yeah I
mean unfortunately it's really hard to
forecast the future like we're always
going to be 10 years ahead sorry 10
years you know 10 years to go from
wherever we are um like we see that with
self-driving we see that um even with
LMS and AI um so it's really hard I mean
everybody's working on it as fast as
possible um it does feel you know it
feels like a Trope to say but it really
does feel like blockchain is the
internet you know like early 1970s early
1990s where things kind of work but
they're like janky um like pets.com or
you know e-commerce all this like
technically worked back in the 90s but
you know the infrastructure wasn't there
for it to be you know widely adopted I
think similarly here uh probably 10
years honestly and you know in 10 years
we'll probably be having the same
conversation and then all of a sudden
it'll just work and we'll be like okay I
guess we got here um but yeah that's I
guess that's my comment really no no
specific way to tell but we're all
working on as as quickly as we can no
that's a great answer I appreciate it so
um what's next on the road map for
pontum Network um you guys have a lot of
great products and tools under your
Suite uh what are what should uh
listeners be keeping their ears to the
ground for um for forthcoming releases
yeah really easily you can download the
wallet and use it for evm so all the
ethereum and uh other evm networks like
BMB Avalanche Etc all the l2s recently
deployed Solano so you can also use sole
assets for the wallet and the wallet is
almost like a leading indicator of where
we're going next so um we're going to be
deploying a tested onto Solana very soon
so you can deploy move and evm
applications and salana VM applications
on top of salana that's going to help a
lot with the congestion issues that have
been going on there um and then we're
going to be moving on to main net um
that that iteration and also the
ethereum one um but yeah that's what's
upcoming um and then that's going to
enable essentially Us and other teams to
start deploying their move and Solon of
VM applications cross I love that uh pay
attention to the wallet as an indicator
to see where you guys are going next um
fantastic way for people to keep their
ears to the ground and and just kind of
uh a reason to give people to to keep
playing with the with the wallet and and
to test the different networks that you
guys are building on um if folks want to
chat with you or get in contact with
your team what's the best way that they
can do so and what's the best way they
can follow along the progress other than
using the wallet of course yeah just
follow us on Twitter pontum Network um
my handle is s DOI Nakamoto just send me
a DM um yeah that's probably the best
way to get in contact with us cool Alo
this was a fascinating conversation I
was really psyched to talk with you
because you guys are building all over
the place and you're building to
integrate with various different
networks l1's l2s uh different VMS so it
was a phenomenal conversation um and I
just want to thank you so much for for
taking the time to join us in the smart
economy podcast awesome thank you thank
you for having me well what did you
think of that conversation I thought it
was really cool to hear alejo's
perspective about working at IBM and how
many of his peers ended up finding their
way onto blockchain native projects
after leaving the Enterprise Arena it
was also interesting to hear how pontum
network is building for a multi-chain
world by leveraging its internal
products but also resources and Tech
Stacks from other ecosystems and I
enjoyed learning more about pontum
Network Building Products to abstract a
specific chain away from the end users
experience which will ultimately allow
them to transact freely on and between
any blockchain network to keep up to
date with the smarte economy podcast
head over to
www.smart economy podcast.com and if you
like the guests that we've had on the
show please consider showing support by
rating and reviewing on your favorite
podcast platform every rate and review
helps us get this show in front of more
people's ears and eyes and of course if
you're a neot token holder please
consider voting for Neo news today as
your Council representative we've
proudly been serving the Neo ecosystem
since 2017 and we'll continue to do so
by putting portions of our Council
rewards directly back into ecosystem
growth initiatives with all that said
thank you so much for taking the time to
listen to the smart economy podcast and
we look forward to catching you next
time cheers guys appreciate you